# Von-Neumann-randomness-extractor

## Overview
A true random number generator (TRNG), as opposed to a pseudo-random number generator (PRNG), requires two key components:

- an unpredictable and random entropy source
- some mechanism to transform that entropy source into a uniformly distributed random output. 

The first requirement is not too difficult to fulfill: there are many good entropy sources such as electrical or atmospheric noise, or shot noise on a camera sensor. However, transforming that entropy source into a uniform random output can prove tricky. The [Von Neumann randomness extractor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Randomness_extractor#Von_Neumann_extractor) is one method of doing this. Given i.i.d. but potentially biased input bits, the Von Neumann extractor will output a sequence of i.i.d. *unbiased* bits, i.e. a Bernoulli sequence with probability parameter 0.5.

In this project, I implement the Von Neumann extractor generally (`von_neumann.c`), and then give driver programs that can use the extractor to generate random numbers from recorded atmospheric noise (`vn_wav.c`) and keyboard input timings (`vn_keyboard.c`). As long as the inputs to the Von Neumann extractor are i.i.d. (independent and identically distributed), the output of the Von Neumann extractor is guaranteed to be an i.i.d. sequence of uniform random bits. With any physical system, it is impossible to be sure with 100% certainty that some quantity is i.i.d. However, here we have some rationale for making this assumption. First, if the measurements are taken far enough apart (whether we measure the values of the waveform of atmospheric noise, or keyboard timing inputs for sufficiently spaced out keyboard taps), they should be independent. In other words, different measurement values should not depend on one another. Second, as long as the quantities we are measuring are consistent across long periods of time, i.e., the behavior of our entropy source is stable, the measurements should share the same probability distribution, and are therefore identically distributed. Lastly, because we only use the least significant bit of the measurements of the waveform of atmospheric noise, these requirements needn't be as stringent: if slight instability is present in the waveform of atmospheric noise over long periods of time, it is unlikely to affect the least significant bits of those measurements with much impact. Therefore I believe both of these conditions to be satisfied for the two entropy sources I use in this project. 

For those interested in these types of design concerns of TRNGs, you could take a look at section 1.3 of [this paper](https://www.boazbarak.org/Papers/trng.pdf) by Barak, Shaltiel, and Tromer, which briefly discusses the Von Neumann extractor, and the use of "far away bits" as sources of i.i.d. inputs to a Von Neumann extractor.

## Usage
Each file contains commented portions that describe how to compile and use each program. You will find a more detailed explanation of compilation options and usage there.

### `vn_wav`
This program takes as input a file of recorded atmospheric noise in `.wav` format, and outputs a binary file generated by the input file and processed by the Von Neumann extractor. The input and output files are given on the command line as follows: 

`$ ./vn_wav input_file.wav output_file`

### `vn_keyboard`
This program prompts the user to press the ENTER key repeatedly, and the time difference between the key inputs is used as an entropy source. Only the least significant bit of the number of nanoseconds between key strokes is used, so as long as keystrokes are a couple seconds apart, the output should be reliably random. (A potential limitation is the resolution, stability, and accuracy of the clock on your system, although as long as it supports nanosecond time resolution this should be fine). The output file to write the random data to is given on the command line:

`$ ./vn_keyboard output_file`

Note: this is not a very efficient way to generate random numbers, as you have to press enter 32 times on average to generate a single byte of random data. This is because there are 8 bits in a byte, two bits must be considered at a time to produce one bit of output, and on average half of the attempts to generate a bit will fail. Thus 8 x 2 x 2 = 32. I think it is interesting nonetheless.
